variables-are-references: content (#61)
Ada-Developers-Academy/core-unit-1: functions-continued/variables-are-references.md

## Objects: Values, Types, and IDs

Objects are a unit of data in programming that consist of three parts:

1. Value
2. Data type
3. Identity

"Object" is a fancy name for data "things" we've been working with so far.`"Hello, World!"` is an _object_, which has a value `"Hello, World!"` and a data type of `str`.

More examples:

- `33` is an object with a value `33` and a data type of `int`
- `True` is an object with a value `True` and a data type of `bool`
- `[81, 231, 12]` is an object with a data type of `list`. It contains three objects.

An object's **identity** is an ID that a machine gives it when it's created. A machine will use an object's ID to find the correct object.

While a program is running, every time an object is created, the object gets put into computer memory and is given an identity. We can think of this ID as the object's address in memory.

We can see an object's ID by using the `id()` function.

```python
print('The ID of the string object "Hello, World!" is', id("Hello, World!"))
```

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer: merge conflict?

> # Variables Are References

Author: Because yaml diffs are horrible to resolve, I typically prefer changing the config on `main` as part of the merge->update config->publish process

> # Variables Are References

Reviewer: Good to know.

- increase our programming skills
- increase our debugging skills
- give us better understanding about computers
- give us better ways to talk about programming
- <del>help us make null pointer exception jokes</del>

The best way we can use our energy in this lesson is to read it, take notes on it, and constantly experiment with code using a Python REPL. Much of this material is learned through typing out code and seeing the output inside a Python REPL. Feel free to use the Python REPL or to make a `.py` file. Copy and paste the code as you go, and modify examples to help understanding.

## Vocabulary and Synonyms

| Vocab           | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Synonyms | How to Use in a Sentence |
| --------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------- | ------------------------ |

> | Object Identity | An object's unique identity that never changes once it's been created. Usually a number. Similar to an object's address in memory. Find this with `id(obj)`. In a comparison that uses `is`, Python compares object IDs. | Object's address in memory | "I knew those two objects were different because they have different object IDs," "Maybe that variable's value is changing because two variables point to the same object with the same object ID"

Author: In this specific case, I think Python really means [object identity](https://docs.python.org/3.7/reference/datamodel.html) (quote to pull: "the id() function returns an integer representing its identity.")

Tbh, I don't think I know enough about what you mean between Object Identifier and Object ID, I'll message you about it unless you get to this comment first?

> | Object Identity | An object's unique identity that never changes once it's been created. Usually a number. Similar to an object's address in memory. Find this with `id(obj)`. In a comparison that uses `is`, Python compares object IDs. | Object's address in memory | "I knew those two objects were different because they have different object IDs," "Maybe that variable's value is changing because two variables point to the same object with the same object ID"

Reviewer: Yeah, I've read that too. I guess my issue is that really, in the larger world, ID can refer to identity or identification, but that's not how I think of it.  I'll bring this up with my therapist. 😄

## Objects: Values, Types, and IDs

Objects are a unit of data in programming that consist of three parts:

1. Value
2. Data type
3. Identity

"Object" is a fancy name for data "things" we've been working with so far.`"Hello, World!"` is an _object_, which has a value `"Hello, World!"` and a data type of `str`.

More examples:

- `33` is an object with a value `33` and a data type of `int`
- `True` is an object with a value `True` and a data type of `bool`
- `[81, 231, 12]` is an object with a data type of `list`. It contains three objects.

An object's **identity** is an ID that a machine gives it when it's created. A machine will use an object's ID to find the correct object.

While a program is running, every time an object is created, the object gets put into computer memory and is given an identity. We can think of this ID as the object's address in memory.

We can see an object's ID by using the `id()` function.

```python
print('The ID of the string object "Hello, World!" is', id("Hello, World!"))
```

> The `is` operator compares object IDs. **_An object's identity never changes once it has been created_**.

Author: What do you think about...

```suggestion
The `is` operator compares object IDs. **_An object's identity never changes within its lifetime_**.
```

The trick here is that I don't particularly think it's useful to define "lifetime" here.... but I the point comes across accurately and deeply enough without that definition...?

> The `is` operator compares object IDs. **_An object's identity never changes once it has been created_**.

Reviewer: That's perfect!

## Variables Are References

Variables are references that point to objects in memory.

Consider this code:

```python
hello_world = "Hello, World!"
current = 33
is_enabled = True
winners = [81, 231, 12]
```

> - `hello_world` is a variable that refers to the object `"Hello, World!"` in memory
> - `current` is a variable that refers to the object `33` in memory
> - `is_enabled` is a variable that refers to the object `True` in memory
> - `winners` is a variable that refers to the object `[81, 231, 12]` in memory

Author: I'd love to make sure that I understand this well enough...

Does this wording still hold true (x out the "copy of" part)?

```suggestion
- `hello_world` is a variable that refers to the object `"Hello, World!"` in memory. It holds the object ID of `"Hello, World!"`.
- `current` is a variable that refers to the object `33` in memory. It holds the object ID of `33`.
- `is_enabled` is a variable that refers to the object `True` in memory. It holds the object ID of `True`.
- `winners` is a variable that refers to the object `[81, 231, 12]` in memory. It holds the object ID of `[81, 231, 12]`.
```

> - `winners` is a variable that refers to the object `[81, 231, 12]` in memory

Reviewer: It's still true. My intent in having the 'copy of' is to imply that this may not be the sole variable holding a reference to the object.  TBH, even saying that the variable holds the object ID is a little wishy washy, but I wanted to give a sense of what it means 'to refer' to an object.  i.e. the variable doesn't hold the object directly, but holds something that can be used to get to the object.

> - `hello_world` is a variable that refers to the object `"Hello, World!"` in memory
> - `current` is a variable that refers to the object `33` in memory
> - `is_enabled` is a variable that refers to the object `True` in memory
> - `winners` is a variable that refers to the object `[81, 231, 12]` in memory

Author: What if...

```suggestion
- `hello_world` is a variable that refers to the object `"Hello, World!"` in memory. It holds something that can be used to get the object directly: a copy of the object ID of `"Hello, World!"`.
- `current` is a variable that refers to the object `33` in memory. It holds a copy of the object ID of `33`.
- `is_enabled` is a variable that refers to the object `True` in memory. It holds a copy of the object ID of `True`.
- `winners` is a variable that refers to the object `[81, 231, 12]` in memory. It holds a copy of the object ID of `[81, 231, 12]`.
```

> - `winners` is a variable that refers to the object `[81, 231, 12]` in memory

Reviewer: I'm starting to think this is trying to be very precise while still being imprecise.  Maybe just drop this whole line of thinking and just go with what you had originally.  Even with all the careful wording around object ID, of course, what the variables _really_ hold is a pointer to some PyObject "derived" type (which has the reference count, and the associated data-or pointer to data for more complicated types).

My main concern is whether students will have an intuitive sense of what 'refers to' means.  This would be  great spot for some visuals.  Chris' lists and references PR goes right for the jugular with memory addresses and diagrams.  Or maybe the less pedantic approach of the "additional analogies" (cut?) would help bridge that once we relax the idea insisting the analogies play true to the underlying implementation int their metaphor. I think I mentioned that in a comment I had put on them?

In any case, I'm leaning back towards reverting to your original version here.

## An Analogy: Variables and Valet Parking

Variables and their values can be described like valet parking services.

Stevie drives their blue car and needs to park at a hotel. They are gifted _free_ valet service (so fancy). The attendant takes the car and parks it in the parking spot numbered 151. The attendant gives a ticket to Stevie and says, "when you want your car back, turn in this special ticket, and your car will come out."

> When Stevie wants their car back, they need to show their special ticket.

Author: Yeah!

Let's go with car valets for now, I like how you're musing on this analogy though. The "Stevie's friend" extension is really exciting IMO

- Variables are like home addresses, such as 123 Main St. The value would be the literal residence located at 123 Main St., walls and doors and all.

- "_The Little Prince_ was not written by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, but _The Little Prince_ was written by a man named Antoine de Saint-Exupéry."

## Immutable vs. Mutable Data Types

The different data types that we commonly work with in Python are `int`, `str`, `float`, `list`, `dict`, and `bool`.

These data types can be classified as either **immutable** or **mutable** data types.

_Mutability_ means an object's ability to change. An object of an _immutable_ data type _cannot be changed_. An object of a _mutable_ data type can be changed, modified, altered, and "mutated," and still be considered the same object.

Some of Python's immutable data types are:

- `int`
- `float`
- `decimal`
- `string`

Some of the mutable data types are:

- `list`
- `dict`

Examples of mutation and modification include:

- Appending or removing an item to a list
- Adding or removing a key-value pair to a dictionary

> 
> What does this _mean_ and how does it impact programming? One of the best ways to witness the differences is to learn how a computer manages them in memory, discussed below.

Author: I think this is a good section, but imo, I think the second example can be explained with piggy-backing off the first example? What do you think?

Also, this rewording focuses on presenting the examples as not necessarily tricky, but some examples and a callout.

```suggestion
Examples of operations that do _not_ mutate or modify include:

- Functions that take in a variable and return some new data, such as `type(hello_world)`
- Functions that do a command, but do not change the value, such as `print(hello_world)`
- Adding two numbers, resulting in a third number, such as `sum = 1 + 2`
- Incrementing a number stored in a variable, like `num += 1`

### !callout-info

## Adding Integers Doesn't Modify

When considering `sum = 1 + 2`, it may seem like we are modifying either the 1 or the 2 to turn it into a 3, which gets assigned to the variable `sum`. In reality, summing 1 and 2 changes neither 1 nor 2. Both retain their 1-ness and 2-ness, but they give us a new value, 3! Then `sum` gets a reference to 3, not the value 3 itself.

<br>

In the case `sum += 1`, by default, this line is evaluated as `sum = sum + 1`. Therefore, it works like the situation above! 1 retains its 1-ness and `sum` gets re-assigned to the new integer value.

### !end-callout

What does this _mean_ and how does it impact programming? One of the best ways to witness the differences is to learn how a computer manages them in memory, discussed below.
```

> What does this _mean_ and how does it impact programming? One of the best ways to witness the differences is to learn how a computer manages them in memory, discussed below.

Reviewer: Weird that a br is required to get the layout you want. 🤷   Is that due to special layout rules within a callout?

In the second example, it's missing an 'of' right at the start.  It should be:

In the case of `sum += 1`, by default, this line is evaluated as `sum = sum + 1`. Therefore, it works like the situation above! 1 retains its 1-ness and `sum` gets re-assigned to the new integer value.

And I'm fine with removing some of the += complexity. It seemed like an operator that could provide confusion about what really is being modified, so paring it down seems like a good idea.

I _don't_ know whether the additional function-focused examples are helpful here.  The implication of mutable and immutable values as function params are touched on later, so maybe they're not necessary?

print("id of kiwis:", id(kiwis))
```

When we run the above code, we may see output like this:

```
id of mangoes: 4346624576
id of kiwis: 4346599360
```

The variables `mangoes` and `kiwis` both have a value of `["hearts", "stars", "horseshoes"]`. However, **they have different object IDs** and occupy different places in memory.

### Modifying a Mutable Object Doesn't Affect Its ID

We can modify a mutable object, and the mutable object will continue to have the same object ID.

```python
mangoes = ["hearts", "stars", "horseshoes"]

print("[Before modification]", "id of mangoes:", id(mangoes))

mangoes.append("clovers")

print("[After modification]", "id of mangoes:", id(mangoes))
print("[After modification]", "value of mangoes", mangoes)
```

When we run the above code, we may see output like this:

```
[Before modification] id of mangoes: 4368230016
[After modification] id of mangoes: 4368230016
[After modification] value of mangoes ['hearts', 'stars', 'horseshoes', 'clovers']
```

_Even after modification_, the mutable object's object ID remains the same.

## Multiple References to Mutable Objects

As mentioned earlier, variables are references to objects in memory.

> Two different variables can end up referring to _the same_ object in memory.

Reviewer: I discussed this situation with immutable objects as well, so now this tone sounds strange.  Add some transition text to recognize the similarity to the previous discussion.

```suggestion
As with immutable objects, we can end up with two different variables referring to _the same_ object in memory. But with mutable objects, the situation is a little more interesting.
```

Imagine a variable `berries` that points to a list in memory. Then imagine a variable `melons` that is assigned to `berries`.

```python
berries = ["hearts", "stars", "horseshoes"]

melons = berries
```

We can describe the relationship between `melons` and `berries` in any of these following ways:

- The value of `melons` is whatever the value of `berries` is

> - The variable `melons` refers to the object that `berries` refers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The variable `melons` refers to the object to which `berries` refers
```

> - `melons` points to `berries`

Reviewer: I don't like this one, since it gives a sense of primacy to berries. melons doesn't point to berries, both melons and berries point to the same object (which is the next bullet).  So I would cut this one.

```suggestion
```

`berries` and `melons` **have the same object ID because they refer to the same object**.

Let's repeat our experiment with a few more variables and confirm:

1. Multiple variables can refer to the same object
1. Reassignment changes what the variable points to

```python
berries = ["hearts", "stars", "horseshoes"]
melons = berries
loquats = melons
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("id of melons:", id(melons))
print("id of loquats:", id(loquats))

print("Reassigning melons to a new object:")

melons = ["sneezy", "sleepy", "happy"]
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("id of melons:", id(melons))
print("id of loquats:", id(loquats))

print("Reassigning melons to berries (again):")

melons = berries
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("id of melons:", id(melons))
print("id of loquats:", id(loquats))
```

```
id of berries: 4510649216
id of melons: 4510649216
id of loquats: 4510649216
Reassigning melons to a new object:
id of berries: 4510649216
id of melons: 4510624000
id of loquats: 4510649216
Reassigning melons to berries (again):
id of berries: 4510649216
id of melons: 4510649216
id of loquats: 4510649216
```

### !callout-success

## Pro-Tip: Experiment!

> There are an infinite number of ways to assign and reassign and check this logic. Experiment in your own Python files!

Reviewer: Is it infinite? Really? 😉

```suggestion
There are a huge number of ways to assign and reassign and check this logic. Experiment in your own Python files!
```

1. Multiple variables can point to the same object

When we combine and synthesize these concepts, we can observe that **multiple references to the same mutable object will all see the same changes**.

```python
berries = ["hearts", "stars", "horseshoes"]
melons = berries

print("Before modifying berries")
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("id of melons:", id(melons))
print("value of melons:", melons)

berries.append("clovers")

print("After modifying berries")
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("id of melons:", id(melons))
print("value of berries:", berries)
print("value of melons:", melons)
```

When we run the above code, we may see output like this:

```
Before modifying berries
id of berries: 4369938880
id of melons: 4369938880
value of melons: ['hearts', 'stars', 'horseshoes']
After modifying berries
id of berries: 4369938880
id of melons: 4369938880
value of berries: ['hearts', 'stars', 'horseshoes', 'clovers']
value of melons: ['hearts', 'stars', 'horseshoes', 'clovers']
```

Re-read through the code slowly, and take notes about how the modification to `berries` affects the value that `melons` points to.

> `berries` and `melons` both point to the same object. We modify the object with object ID `4369938880` with `berries.append("clovers")`. We see that the value of `melons` (which points to the object `4369938880`) is also modified.

Reviewer: Add also to the parenthetical for reinforcement, and then rephrase the following 'also' so it doesn't sound repetitive.

```suggestion
`berries` and `melons` both point to the same object. We modify the object with object ID `4369938880` with `berries.append("clovers")`. We see that the value of `melons` (which also points to the object `4369938880`) is modified as well.
```

## Applied in Function Arguments

> When we pass in values into a function call, we should have awareness about if we are passing a mutable object or immutable object.

Reviewer: a few small changes
```suggestion
When we pass values into a function call, we should be aware of whether we are passing a mutable or an immutable object.
```

```python
def add_clovers(charms):
    print("==== Appending 'clovers' to charms ====")
    print("id of charms:", id(charms))
    charms.append("clovers")

berries = ["hearts", "stars", "horseshoes"]
print("==== Before calling add_clovers ====")
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("value of berries:", berries)

add_clovers(berries)

print("==== After calling add_clovers ====")
print("id of berries:", id(berries))
print("value of berries:", berries)
```

When we run the above code, we may see output like this:

```
==== Before calling add_clovers ====
id of berries: 4460399680
value of berries: ['hearts', 'stars', 'horseshoes']
==== Appending 'clovers' to charms ====
id of charms: 4460399680
==== After calling add_clovers ====
id of berries: 4460399680
value of berries: ['hearts', 'stars', 'horseshoes', 'clovers']
```

We should observe:

1. `berries` points to a mutable object
1. When we call `add_clovers`
   - We pass in `berries`
   - `charms` points to the same mutable object that `berries` does
1. The object that `charms` points to is modified with `charms.append()`
1. Because `charms` was modified, so was `berries`

### Immutable Objects Passed Into Functions

> When we pass an immutable object into a function, that function cannot modify the object passed in. Any "modifications" are likely reassignment.

Reviewer: Suggest emphasis on immutable since it's easy to lose track of which we're talking about.
Set up the following example.

```suggestion
When we pass an _immutable_ object into a function, that function cannot modify the object passed in. Any "modifications" are likely reassignment.

Recall that reassignment replaces a variable's reference with a reference to the new object. Since parameters are local variables, only the local reference is replaced. The external variable is left unchanged, as a brief example will show.
```

```python
def add_lucky_bonus(score):
    print("id of score:", id(score))
    print("==== Adding 777 to score ====")
    score += 777
    print("id of score:", id(score))

jackfruit = 222
print("==== Before calling add_lucky_bonus ====")
print("id of jackfruit:", id(jackfruit))
print("value of jackfruit:", jackfruit)

add_lucky_bonus(jackfruit)

print("==== After calling add_lucky_bonus ====")
print("id of jackfruit:", id(jackfruit))
print("value of jackfruit:", jackfruit)
```

When we run the above code, we may see output like this:

```
==== Before calling add_lucky_bonus ====
id of jackfruit: 4539856336
value of jackfruit: 222
id of score: 4539856336
==== Adding 777 to score ====
id of score: 4551559440
==== After calling add_lucky_bonus ====
id of jackfruit: 4539856336
value of jackfruit: 222
```

We should observe:

1. `jackfruit` points to an immutable object
1. When we call `add_lucky_bonus`
   - We pass in `jackfruit`
   - `score` initially points to the same object as `jackfruit`
   - After `score += 777`, `score` points to a different immutable object
1. `jackfruit` continues to point to the same immutable object

## Extending the Concept: Nested Data Structures

> Lists and dictionaries are not only mutable data types, but they're also _containers_. As containers, they contain either mutable or immutable data types itself!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lists and dictionaries are not only mutable data types, but they're also _containers_. As containers, they contain either mutable or immutable data types themselves!
```

* title: Variables Are References
##### !question

Predict:

- Imagine a list within a list. If we modify the inner list, does that affect the references pointing to it?
- Imagine a dictionary within a list. What are the effects of modifying the inner dictionary?

##### !end-question
##### !placeholder

I predict...

##### !end-placeholder
### !end-challenge
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Now, read through this code and its example output:

```python
peaches = ["Hello", [False, False, False] ,"World!"]

pears = peaches[1]

pears.append(True)

print("value of peaches:", peaches)
```

```
value of peaches: ['Hello', [False, False, False, True], 'World!']
```

`peaches[1]` _and_ `pears` both point to the mutable object `[False, False, False]`.

When we modify that object with `pears.append()`, we modify the same object referred to by `peaches[1]`.

Let's look at an example dictionary inside a list:

```python
pears = {
    "hello": "world!"
}

peaches = [False, pears, False]

pears["hello"] = "modified value"

print("value of peaches:", peaches)
```

```
value of peaches: [False, {'hello': 'modified value'}, False]
```

`pears` and `peaches[1]` refer to the same dictionary object.

> Giving a new value to a key in a dictionary counts as modification. Modifying `pear` affects the item at `peaches[1]`.

Reviewer: "counts as modification" makes it sound like there are a lot of arcane rules about what things are modification, and what aren't. An intuitive understanding will probably be good enough going forward, but even if we do need further explanations, I think this has the chance of putting up a mental block before we get the chance to present the discussion.
pear -> pears

```suggestion
We modified the dictionary referred to by `pears` by storing a new value for the `"hello"` key. Modifying `pears` also affects the item at `peaches[1]`.
```

Author: This is an extra good note for me to think about, thanks!

### !callout-info

## Endless Combinations

Curious about more combinations, such as a list in a dictionary, or a list inside a list inside a list? Follow your curiosity and experiment!

### !end-callout

### !callout-success

## Foreshadowing: OOP

When discussing object-oriented programming, we'll write user-defined classes. User-defined classes are mutable data types by default.

### !end-callout

> ## Best Pattern: Reassign Often, Return Often

Reviewer: How about this instead? I think it emphasizes the importance of using return values, which seems like the most important take away from this.
```suggestion
## Prefer Returning Results Over Modifying Inputs
```

> References and immutability should primarily affect our programming with awareness.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this was getting at, but maybe something like this?

```suggestion
We must remain aware of how references and mutable objects interact within our functions.
```

Without awareness, modifying a mutable object risks unintentionally affecting other references.

As general patterns to takeaway:

1. Stay aware of the difference between modifying and reassigning
1. While programming, create diagrams to help understand references between variables and objects

> 1. It's more reliable to _return_ any important values from a function, rather than modify a value

Reviewer: Provide justification for why we should return results rather than modifying inputs.

```suggestion
1. It's usually more desirable to _return_ important results from a function, rather than modifying a value that was passed in
    1. Callers of our functions usually don't expect the values they pass in to be modified unless there is clear documentation that your function will do so
```
